---
title: "How to perform CompCor on HCP fMRI data in R"
author: "Damon Pham"
date: "2021-01-29"
knit: (function(inputFile, encoding) { 
      rmarkdown::render(inputFile,
                        encoding=encoding, 
                        output_file=file.path('~/Documents/Github/mandymejia.github.io/_posts/', '2021-01-29-CompCor.md')) })
output:
  md_document:
    variant: gfm
    preserve_yaml: true
---

This is a guest post written by Damon Pham. Damon is a graduate of
Indiana University, where he was a Wells Scholar (the highest honor for
incoming IU students) and all around extraordinaire. He has been part of
my research group for the last several years, where one of his main
focuses has been developing software to advance and facilitate research
using CIFTI- and surface-format data. He has also been working on
methods for outlier detection in fMRI data. (Update: Check out his
*NeuroImage* paper on this
[here](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.119972)!) In that work
we decided to use aCompCor as a preprocessing step before outlier
detection. Since we are using CIFTI-format HCP fMRI data, figuring out
how to actually do aCompCor was an undertaking. Below, Damon describes
why and how he did this. We hope this is useful for other researchers
wanting to use CompCor on CIFTI-format data in the HCP and beyond.

Take it away, Damon!

## What is aCompCor?

There are many sources of noise in fMRI, and perhaps many more ways to
clean it up. One such technique is anatomical CompCor (aCompCor), first
presented by Behzadi et. al. (2007). Numerous studies including
Muschelli et. al. (2014) and Ciric et. al. (2017) have demonstrated its
effectiveness for attenuating the effects of motion and improving
functional connectivity estimates, among other benchmarks, compared to
alternatives. aCompCor is also quite simple in theory. It’s based on the
observation that the BOLD signal in white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) is not neuronal in origin. Thus, variation common to gray
matter and WM or CSF should be artifactual (e.g. due to motion,
heartbeat, respiration, scanner drift). aCompCor regresses the top few
principal components (PCs) within WM and CSF from the grey matter,
thereby removing shared variation thought to represent noise.

We’ve observed that aCompCor is really good at attenuating trends and
sudden shifts in the data. Both patterns are not of neuronal origin, and
later analyses such as functional connectivity assume that they have
been eliminated. Let’s see an example of aCompCor in action! Here’s the
timecourse of an arbitrary grey matter voxel before and after aCompCor-5
(five WM PCs and five CSF PCs):

<span style="color:red"> ***… this post was originally written on my old
blog. Read the full post
[here](https://mandymejia.wordpress.com/2021/01/29/how-to-perform-compcor-on-hcp-fmri-data-in-r/).
*** </span>
